Prof: Good morning.
So we got to the end of Karl
Marx today.
And after a long detour we are
finally at the Marx you are
probably the most familiar with,
or the kind of Marx you have
heard the most about.
The major-- my major aim so far
in this course was to shake a
little the stereotypes which was
in your head about Marx,
to show you that Marx was a
much more complex thinker,
full with contradictions,
and in a search for truth.
Whether he arrived at truth,
that's another question,
but he was desperately
searching for it.
So we went around different
epochs of Marx.
Right?
In The Paris
Manuscripts,
the first attempt to write a
big work, we saw him as a
Hegelian.
The central concept is still
alienation, a Hegelian concept.
Then he breaks away. Right?
He turns into a historical
materialist in The German
Ideology,
but does not quite get it yet.
Right?
Too much under the influence of
Adam Smith.
The division of labor is still
important and private property
does not get the centrality of
the analysis,
what it's supposed to have for
the theory.
Then you read the
Grundrisse,
in which he kind of--now
private property is in the
central place,
but he tries to bring back the
idea of alienation.
And he also considers that in
The German Ideology he
became too deterministic;
history is more open than he
may have believed.
And then finally he finishes
the book--at least the first
volume of the book he always
wanted to write--Das
Kapital.
And in the Kapital,
only the first volume was
finished by him,
and it was the only first
volume what he thought was ready
for publication,
and came out in 1867.
He offers a very coherent,
very cogent argument.
It's not a messy text like the
Paris Manuscript or
The German Ideology or
the Grundrisse.
Marx felt this is ready to be
printed;
and it was ready to be printed
for sure.
And this is now his major
contribution,
the theory of exploitation.
That is undoubtedly Marx's
major contribution to social
theory.
Whether it is right or wrong,
this is another question.
I think there are few people
who would accept his theory of
exploitation the way how it was
formulated.
But there are still quite a few
theorists around here who are
attracted to the idea of
exploitation and try to
re-conceptualize the notion of
exploitation in one way or
another.
And it's also something which
has very much entered the public
discourse.
You yourself use it.
Occasionally you feel I have
been exploited.
And it actually has quite a bit
to do with what Marx thought
about exploitation,
when you say,
"This is an exploitative
relationship."
Right?
So the term is with us.
Okay, then of course in order
to have the theory of
exploitation,
this is necessary for Marx to
have a tight conception of the
theory of classes.
And the text I asked you to
read for his theory of classes
is an old text,
much precedes the theory of
exploitation,
The Communist Manifesto.
It's also only a pamphlet,
it is a political pamphlet.
It's not aimed for a scholarly
audience.
It does not argue its case in
the scholarly way,
as most of the argument is put
forward in the chapters I asked
you to read from Kapital.
Right?
But it has very important
theoretical insights.
In fact, though Marx does not
have the theory of exploitation,
he still comes very close to a
mature class theory.
What is interesting though,
today we identify Marx as
certainly one of the great
theorists who created the idea
of class.
The other one is,
by the way, Max Weber.
What is also interesting about
both of them,
that they never wrote any
coherent analysis what class is.
Well in The Communist
Manifesto,
Marx and Engels write a fair
deal about class,
but they don't have the
conceptual apparatus yet really
to do it right.
And by the time he has,
after he finished the first
volume of Kapital,
he actually makes an attempt,
what eventually was published
by Engels as the third volume of
Kapital.
And here, in chapter 52,
he said, "Now this is time
to write my theory of
class."
He writes a page and a half,
and then he abandons it.
He said, "I can't do it;
too difficult." Right?
So it leaves to
you--right?--and the next text--
test in this course,
to figure out what the right
theory of classes are,
and what's wrong about it.
Right?
In fact, Weber is pretty much
in the same bind.
He writes a little more than
one-and-a-half page,
but not much more.
We will talk about this when we
come to Max Weber.
But classes certainly still do
haunt us.
Right?
We cannot get the idea of class
out of our hair.
Even in the United States the
notion is around us;
though there is no other modern
society which is so free from
the idea of class and
exploitation as the US of A.
But even in the US of A,
we still talk at least about
the middle class.
So the term is not completely
alien from us.
Okay, so let's jump into this,
and let's do it this time in a
reverse order--
that I start with the mature
theory,
1867, and then informed by this
theory I go back to 1848,
The Communist Manifesto,
and deal with this.
So the major themes for the
lecture today is I want to
elaborate on the theory of
exploitation in Marx,
his idea of classes in history,
and finally to ask the
question,
how many classes are there?
Marx seems to have
contradictory answers to this
question.
And this is certainly a
question which still fascinates
people who are studying society,
social stratification or class
structure.
Of course the answer seems to
be obvious probably to most of
you.
Yeah, in the United States
there is one class,
the middle class;
we are all middle class. Right?
That's the typical American
answer to this.
But for an analyst it's a bit
dubious answer;
if there are classes,
how on earth there is only one?
Anyway, we will talk about this
a great deal.
So let's move to the question
of theory of exploitation.
And I will have to start this
with the labor theory of value,
and to go back to Adam Smith
and to see how Marx is
proceeding.
Then I want to make a step
further, Marx's distinction
between commodity production and
the capitalist mode of
production.
This is again taking his point
of departure as Adam Smith's,
Adam Smith's idea of commercial
society.
And what Marx does,
well there are different types
of commercial societies.
One he calls the petty
commodity production,
and the other one capitalist
mode of production.
As we all know,
he never used the term
capitalism.
He comes the closest to this
concept by using the term
capitalist mode of production.
Neither Smith nor Marx had the
concept of capitalism,
as such.
Then in order to understand
what is unique about the
capitalist mode of production,
we have to understand Marx's
theory of labor power as a
commodity.
And I will explain to you why
this is so central to Marx's
theory of exploitation,
and then Marx's theory of
class.
Okay, so that's about it.
And now the labor theory of
value.
The point of departure is John
Locke and Adam Smith.
Right?
As you recall,
already John Locke suggested
that all value is created by
labor;
or, I mean, he's a little more
cautious, at least 90% of all
value is created by labor.
How on earth he comes up with
this figure?
He's not very accurate about
this, not very forthcoming.
Right?
Social scientists today would
be a bit upset.
"Where do you get this
number from?"
Right?
He doesn't tell us.
But the bottom line is well
taken.
Right?
You remember
clearly--right?--his wonderful
proposition.
"The water in the well
belongs to everybody.
But who doubts that those who
fetch it--the water--that water
belongs to him or her?
Because it is his or her
product, labor product.
And what is the value of that
water, what you are carrying
away from the well,
what you did fetch from the
well?
Exactly the amount of labor you
had to put in,
in order to fetch that."
Clear, right?
A nice theory of
property--right?--and a nice
labor theory of value,
though it's not quite called
this way by John Locke.
But so is by Adam Smith.
And, as you recall,
Adam Smith claims at one point,
"All value is created by
labor."
Well but of course Adam Smith,
when he comes to explaining the
distribution of wealth,
takes a step back from this
proposition.
And we discussed that when we
discussed Adam Smith.
Let me just remind you what the
step backward.
Right?
The tension--right?--in Adam
Smith was that on one hand he
claims all value is created by
labor,
and then when it comes to the
question but how is wealth or
income distributed.
He said, "Well it ought to
be distributed between the three
factors of
production--right?--labor,
capital and land;
wages, profit and rent.
And they have to be equally
distributed in a just way,
between these three factors of
production."
Right?
And I think you remember we
clarified that this is not a
contradiction in Adam Smith.
Somehow when he's claiming that
all value is created by labor,
he almost has a theory of human
nature.
Right?
That in the state of nature,
when there is no private
property of land,
and there is no accumulation of
capital, then all value is
created by labor.
But this is just in this
imagined--right?--natural
conditions of existence.
In all complex societies
private ownership exists and
private--and capital is being
accumulated.
And then, you know,
in order to get production
going, the capitalist has to
rent--give capital,
advance capital,
to the worker.
Without the advancement of
capital, the laborer would not
work.
And therefore the owner of
capital has due claim for part
of the value which is created in
the process of production.
Because it took
risks--right?--by offering its
capital,
and it had to supervise the
labor process,
and wants to have compensated
for its risk taking and its
supervision.
And you could not operate
without land,
without a site.
All activities need a site,
and if somebody owns that site,
they'll have to be compensated
that you are on the site;
and that is rent.
Well this is a little more
problematic in Adam Smith.
You know, for capital he makes
a pretty strong case,
you know, why it is fair for
the capitalist to collect
profit.
For the owner of the land,
he--they are collecting rent.
That's a little more
problematic, whether rent is
also something,
a just income.
And we all have a little
unease--right?--when we are
talking about rent,
or when we are talking about,
for instance,
rent-seeking behavior.
Right?
That sounds a bad behavior,
if somebody's seeking rent.
Right?
The reason is simple;
because we associate in our
mind rent-seeking behavior with
monopoly.
Right?
Rent-seeking behavior comes
from monopolistic ownership,
and we don't particularly like
monopolies.
Right?
We want competition,
free competition--right?
Free markets,
and not monopolies.
Right?
Monopoly's a bad word.
Anyway, this is a little of a
problem.
But nevertheless I think his
fundamental point,
in Adam Smith,
that there is some fair
distribution of income between
the three factors of production,
because they are all necessary
for the production for the
production process.
I just suggested that,
in fact, there are still
people, scholars,
who are seriously interested in
the theory of exploitation
today.
They usually abandon the labor
theory of value.
I have not met yet an economist
or political economist,
or even a sociologist or
political scientist,
who still believes in the labor
theory of value.
Right?
So now therefore when they try
to construct a theory of
exploitation,
it is more around the theory of
rent, rather than labor theory
of value.
Okay, then let's move further
and let's try to figure out
how--what Marx does to Adam
Smith, and how he radicalizes
Adam Smith.
Marx does not want to go the
Adam Smithsian way,
to say there is a fair
distribution of wealth between
the three factors of production.
First of all he asks the
question, okay,
what is value?
And he defines value with this
very simple equation.
C is constant capital. Right?
Constant capital means the
capital which is advanced by the
capitalist in order to make the
labor process possible.
Constant capital can of course
involve the improvement on the
land, on the site what you are
using for your production
process.
Right?
If there is a building put up
on a site,
the cost of the building will
have to be returned in the
process of production--
right?--and therefore it will
also contribute to the value of
the product.
V is variable capital.
Variable capital means wages.
And S is what he calls surplus
product.
This is--you produce a product,
you sell it.
It is not enough for you,
in order to be and stay in
business,
if all what you collect a
return of the capital you
advanced for the production,
and the wages what you paid to
your laborers to complete the
process.
If you would do that,
you would be done.
Right?
All smart entrepreneurs want to
generate some surplus.
They want to get a little more
than they started with.
Otherwise why on earth would
they waste their time on this?
Right?
Why on earth would they take
risks?
Why would they spend their time
supervising the process?
Why would they start worrying
whether this will work out or
not?
They need a surplus.
So therefore that is the value
of the product.
Now, and here it is. Right?
Constant capital is investment.
And here there is an
agreement--right?--with Adam
Smith.
Right?
You have--right?--factors of
production.
But Marx wants to be
consistent--consistent in saying
that all value is being created
by labor.
And he said,
"But what is constant
capital?
Where does constant capital
come from?"
He said it is coming from labor.
It is accumulated labor.
It is labor which was actually
performed before capital
accumulation,
was appropriated by the
capitalist,
and it is being now used as
constant capital.
So there is,
one argument is,
all capital was at one point a
product of labor,
and that is what is your
investment.
As I said, variable capital are
wages.
And then there is surplus
product.
And that surplus product,
Marx argued,
is also the outcome of the
labor process and the product of
the laborer as such.
So Marx starts to shy away from
the idea that there is a kind of
fair distribution between
capital, land and labor.
He said, "No,
I mean, all value is being
created by labor."
So this is his kind of
reconstruction of the labor
theory of value,
and leads us into the idea of
exploitation.
Right?
I will labor on this in a
minute, to try to put more meat
on it.
But the essence of exploitation
is that what the capitalist will
advance is actually labor which
was appropriated from the
workers in an earlier cycle of
the production,
and then the capitalist will
pocket the surplus,
will not give any to the worker;
a worker will be satisfied with
the wages.
And this is where exploitation
comes from.
Right?
Exploitation somehow has to do
with what the capitalist had to
put into the production process.
Right?
Constant capital and variable
capital, and how much he
pocketed after the process was
over.
So there is no--nothing fair
about this, in Marx's view.
This is--right?--the big
difference between social
democratic trade unions who
wants to keep the capitalist
system going;
they just want to have
collective bargaining and
negotiation--
right?--with the employers,
so to have a reasonable level
of profit to the capitalist and
a reasonably high level of wages
for the workers.
Marx said, "Well there is
nothing reasonable.
This is a system,
an exploitative system."
Well, and this is what I said:
"The rate of profit will
be the surplus divided by the
expenditures."
Okay, let's move a little
further and makes--
and let's have this important
contribution what Marx makes
between petty commodity
production and capitalist mode
of production,
right?
It's trying to sort of break up
Adam Smith's idea of commercial
society or market economy or
capitalism.
Marx seemed to have a more
complex notion.
Well he said this is petty
commodity production,
and he again offers us a little
equation here.
He said petty commodity
production begins with a
commodity,
and then you go to the
marketplace,
sell this commodity for money,
in order to purchase a
commodity.
This itself is commercial
society.
This is commodity production.
But it is not capitalism. Right?
This is why Marx,
for instance,
was a bit uncertain,
and he's rambling about this a
little.
Is the United States,
in the early nineteenth
century, really a capitalist
economy?
And he was puzzled by this
because the overwhelming
majority of Americans were
actually involved in
self-employment.
It was a highly commercialized
society, a highly developed
market economy,
but there was relatively little
private capital accumulation.
Most people were farmers or
self-employed artisans or
merchants.
And what did they do?
They did produce commodities.
You were a shoemaker,
you produced a shoe.
But you were specializing in
shoemaking, and you did not
bother you try to also raise
chickens and to have eggs.
So you needed eggs.
So you brought shoes on the
market,
you sold the shoe for money,
and then you went to the farmer
and you bought egg,
so you could have your
scrambled eggs.
Right?
Okay, that is petty commodity
production.
Right?
And the purpose of
production--this is a very
important proposition by
Marx--is satisfaction of needs.
Right?
You are operating,
you are producing stuff because
you have certain needs what you
want to satisfy,
and the production of some
good, well in excess of what you
need,
has the purpose to satisfy
other needs what you have,
and money is simply a mediator
to make sure that different
types of needs are being
properly exchanged on the
marketplace.
Right?
Now Marx here is way beyond
Marx of the Paris
Manuscripts--
right?--who tried to identify
markets and commodity exchange
as the source of alienation.
There is nothing alienating
about this process.
Right?
Now but then he said well
capitalism is a different
ballgame.
We are talking about a
capitalist economy when the
cycle starts with money.
And though, I mean,
the chapters you have read,
Marx tries to discipline
himself.
He tries to really behave and
to be a scholar.
Right?
But he can't resist. Right?
His emotions--right?--and his
values are too strong.
So he said, "Your
moneybag,"
talking about the capitalists.
He should not have said so.
Right?
He could have done this coolly,
objectively,
simply to say, "Well,
we have an economic system in
which we have--
right?--people who accumulated
capital,
and they are entering the
marketplace.
And what do they do?
They produce commodities.
And why do they do so?
Because they want to have more
money;
that's it."
And I would say this is bingo.
Right?
I mean, the comparison between
the two is really capturing,
in a very powerful
way--right?--the emergence what
we understand a capitalist
economy--
right?--as distinct simply from
a commercial society.
I think this is a very,
very important and very
insightful, very simple,
very precise,
and very persuasive argument.
Now let me just say a few more
words about this.
Why is this so?
Why does a capitalist need more
money than it started the
process?
And I will get into it a bit
later in more details.
Well there are very good
reasons for it.
One reason we already mentioned.
Why should the capitalist
bother--right?--advancing
capital and taking risks,
unless it is compensated by
more money?
And that's in itself a good
enough reason.
But there is an even more
important reason.
We are on a competitive
marketplace;
in a competitive marketplace,
in a capitalist economy--
which in Marx's own words is
the most dynamic economy in
human history--
there is improvement in
technologies.
The capitalist will create more
money because it will have to
reinvest this money in the
production process.
It has to improve its
technology;
it if would stop to do so,
the competition would wipe it
out.
So the capitalist has to
collect--right?--more money than
it started the production
process.
Even the most altruistic
capitalist has to collect more
money at the end of the process.
Even the capitalist who said,
"I'm such a good man.
All what I'm doing is to
creating jobs for those poor,
poor people,
that they can have a decent
living and a nice suburban home.
And I don't want anything in
exchange for it.
I do it out of altruism."
Okay, let's imagine our
altruistic moneybag.
Right?
Still the poor guy does not
have a chance.
It has to collect more money
because otherwise next year he
will not be around any longer.
He cannot be altruistic any
longer because the competition
will wipe him out.
Right?
That's the argument.
Okay.
So now here comes Marx.
He said, "This is a big
change,
because now the purpose of
production is not satisfaction
of needs,
but it is really a generation
of profit,
which is inevitable because
competition among
capitalists."
Now comes a big puzzle.
Where on earth do more money
comes from?
How is it possible that the
capitalist goes out with money,
buys commodities,
and gets more money at the end?
Is the capitalist cheating us?
Buys cheap and sells dear?
He said, "Well this is
impossible.
If there would be a capitalist
who would buy cheap and sell
dear,
and would pocket a profit this
way,
there will be others who will
say, 'Well I will compete and I
will sell it less expensively,
and I will sell more,
and I will create more profit,
and we'll push these
artificially high prices down.
There is supply and demand
which sets the prices'."
So that more money cannot come
out of cheating.
Right?
It simply cannot come out
simply for circulation.
It somehow has to come out from
the production.
Now how can it happen that more
money is created?
And this is where the idea of
labor power as a commodity comes
in.
What the capitalist does is
buys from the marketplace a
specific commodity,
and this specific commodity is
labor market.
And labor market,
so Marx argues,
is that commodity--
the only commodity--which
actually can produce a higher
value when it is consumed than
its own value.
In every other
input--right?--raw material,
the amount of labor which was
put into that raw material,
where in a production process
you consume it,
that is being transferred into
value of the new product.
So you are producing a
refrigerator,
you need steel or aluminum to
produce it;
the value which was put into
the production of steel or
aluminum will be carried over,
exactly the same amount,
into the refrigerator you
produce.
So it cannot create more value.
Right?
What can create--the only
commodity which produces
more--is labor power as such.
Well, and this is also
important, that Marx suggests
therefore what the laborer has
to sell cannot be labor,
it must be labor power.
Well you may be--Talmudistic
stuff--right?--this twisting
words.
But it isn't.
I think there's an important
idea he said.
He said if you would sell
labor, then--
and if John Locke was right and
all value is created by the
laborer and belongs to the
laborer--
then the capitalist would have
to cheat you.
Right?
Would not be able to sell--give
you the price of your labor;
could not have a surplus value
or a profit otherwise.
Therefore the capitalist will
have to buy labor power,
the capacity of work.
And Marx insists we have to
think about a system in which
the capitalist price pays the
proper price--
the exact price,
the market price,
the right market price--
for labor power.
The worker is not cheated;
the worker is exploited,
but that's not cheating,
right?
So why?
What is so unique about the
labor power?
Right?
And let me just emphasize,
it's very, very important for
these chapters what you have
read.
That those are always
equivalents which have to
exchange each other at the
marketplace.
No cheating.
The worker is not being cheated.
It gets the proper price for
this labor power.
So but what is the price of the
labor power?
It's exactly like the price of
any other commodity;
the price of its reproduction.
Right?
How much labor is necessary to
reproduce that commodity.
If labor power is a commodity,
the price of the labor power is
exactly how much is necessary to
reproduce that labor power.
It involves--right?--the cost
of your housing,
the cost of your living,
and the extended reproduction
of labor power.
It involves that you have to
raise children.
It involves education;
you know, human capital
investment.
This all will have to be
compensated for the laborer.
But if it is compensated,
then the laborer is compensated
for its laboring capacities,
labor power,
will work under the supervision
of the capitalist,
and the capitalist will make
sure that the laborer,
after the costs of the
reproduction of labor power are
covered,
will work another three or four
or five hours,
under the supervision of the
capitalist,
and start producing surplus
value for the capitalist,
or profit for the capitalist.
Right?
That is--right?--a stroke of
the genius.
Right?
That's the big solution what
he's offering.
And this is why I said though
there is a heavy--of course he
hates capitalism,
of course he hates
exploitation.
But if you look at the logic of
the analysis,
this is pretty cool-headed
analysis and does not imply
value judgments.
Right?
Does not imply moral judgment.
You can go through of this to
say, "Yes.
Why?
Sure.
That's it, that's how the
system works."
He does hate it,
and as I said he cannot stop,
and expresses it.
Okay, let me talk about classes
very briefly.
And now we are back to The
Communist Manifesto.
And there are really a couple
of issues here.
He's talking about classes as a
trans-historical category,
which in a way is contradictory
to the argument of Das
Kapital.
He's talking about the
bourgeoisie as a new class and
as a progressive class.
Now let's look at this,
classes as a trans-historical
category.
Right?
This is written almost twenty
years before Das Kapital,
without the theory of
exploitation.
And he said the history of all
previously existing societies is
the history of class struggle.
And you remember I said this
idea is becoming already in
The German Ideology,
where he tries to develop these
causal mechanisms--
right?--which explains
evolution in history.
And this is class struggle all
along.
Right?
The struggle of the slaves
against the slave owners,
the serfs against the landlord,
and finally it will be the
struggle of the proletariat
against the bourgeoisie.
That's the idea. Right?
And this is being used in a
trans-historical way.
The trouble is that this is
obviously wrong.
It's wrong in terms of Marx's
own theory of exploitation,
and actually it is also
empirically a wrong statement.
Right?
Why it is wrong in terms of
Marx?
Because it doesn't fit the
theory of exploitation.
Right?
If exploitation is unique for a
capitalist mode of production,
reasonably you can talk only
about classes in a capitalist
mode of production where the
labor power is free in the dual
sense of the term--
legally free and freed from the
means of production and
therefore has to sell its labor
power.
Right?
If this does not exist,
you should not use the term of
classes.
So this is a contradiction in
Marx's own analysis.
And, of course,
it is empirically wrong,
because it's true there were
class struggles in history,
but was antiquity overthrown by
the revolt of slave owners
against the slaves?
No, it wasn't.
As we have learned from Marx,
it fell because it was invaded
by Germanic tribes.
Did, in the South,
slavery end up because the
slaves revolted against the
slave owners?
No.
Because capitalists from the
North initiated a war against
the South.
Right?
Did the proletariat ever revolt
to overthrow the bourgeoisie?
Not really.
In countries where we are
talking about proletarian
revolutions, there were hardly
any proletarians.
How many proletarians were
there in China in 1949?
It was obviously an
overwhelmingly peasant economy.
Right?
Those were peasant masses who
demanded land,
who carried out the revolution
under the leadership of Mao
Zedong.
Russia, not much different in
1917.
So it's simply not true.
It's also not true that the
classes which were subordinated
earlier will become the new
dominant classes.
I mean, the slaves did not
became the landlords,
the serfs did not become the
grand bourgeoisie,
and the proletariat certainly
did not become a dominant class
in China or in the Soviet Union.
Right?
This is all wrong. Right?
But the argument is still
interesting.
Then most
importantly--right?--the
bourgeoisie, he said,
is a new class,
and probably,
arguably, the first real class.
The landlords were not a class
because they were not
constituted in economic terms.
They were constituted
legally--right?--and by customs,
rather than simply on market
exchange and market competition.
And he also said,
"Well, this bourgeoisie
was an extremely revolutionary
force." Right?
"And it actually
transformed the whole
society."
And here I think there is--even
in The Communist Manifesto
he contradicts himself.
He said, "Well, you know,
what it did,
it transformed occupations,
which were based on honor
before, into class
positions."
Right?
It converted the position of a
doctor or a lawyer or a priest
into a kind of class-like
position.
Though their power
traditionally was based on
honor--they were honorable
positions--now they become
positions for which an income is
being paid.
All right.
And then he writes--it's very
important to appreciate that
Marx sees that the bourgeoisie
did play an extremely important
progressive role in history.
But it's not only--he hates the
guts of the bourgeoisie for
sure,
but he appreciates the
contribution of the bourgeoisie
for the development of modern
society.
Right?
He said, "The bourgeoisie
cannot exist without constantly
revolutionalizing the
instruments of production.
Right?
"In a scarce one-hundred
years has created more massive
and more colossal productive
forces than we have all
preceding generations
together."
Well, sounds like somebody who
loves capitalism.
Right?
Though of course he doesn't,
because he thinks it will
eventually destroy itself.
Now the last issue is about how
many classes.
And well what follows from the
logic of Das Kapital,
and I think it is also the
point of Marx in The
Communist Manifesto,
there are two classes:
the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat.
Right?
The moneybags and the workers.
And the workers are exploited
by the moneybags,
and that's the reason for class
struggle, and that's what
eventually will lead to
revolution.
But my goodness,
where are the middle classes?
There were not all that many
proletarians in 1867.
There was no society,
except industrialized Soviet
Union, where the majority of the
population was industrial
worker, but no ruling class.
They were exploited and
screwed, don't worry about it.
But they were in majority.
But it never happened in
Western societies.
We never reached a point--and
then, of course,
the industrial working class
has been declining.
Now, properly speaking,
the industrial working class in
the United States is probably
not more than 15% of the
population.
So where is the middle class?
So well I don't have much time.
Let's rush through of this.
Well he said there is,
you know, these elemental
confrontations between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
Well he does not have the
theory of exploitation;
he cannot explain it quite well.
And you can do it by now,
armed with Das Kapital.
Right?
This is a contradiction
because, you know,
the proletariat has no choice
but sell its labor power and be
exploited.
And this is,
of course, an irreconcilable
contradiction.
And what about the middle class?
Well Marx said
"Yeah..."
Well he is--of course even in a
political pamphlet--
he is a good enough scientist,
social scientist,
that he will say, "No,
there is no middle class."
He knows there is a middle
class-- that most people do not
belong to the bourgeoisie,
and the proletariat in 1848.
And, as I said, they never did.
But he said,
"Well, but look at it
historically.
What we call middle class is
disappearing.
Look at all those peasants and
small artisans and small
merchants,
they will all disappear,
and they will all have to
either--
very few of them will become
big capitalists,
and the overwhelming majority
of them will become working
workers."
Well this is not without
insights.
Right?
For about a hundred years after
The Communist Manifesto
the trend was going in this
direction.
Right?
Self-employment was shrinking,
and the wage labor was
increasing.
Right?
In big ways. Right?
In the mid-nineteenth century
70 to 90% of the population was
working in agriculture and was
self-employed in other
businesses.
Right?
Today in the United States the
agricultural population,
I don't know the exactly the
most current figure is somewhere
between 1 to 2%.
Right?
And self-employment has been
substantially reduced for a very
long time.
But things happened what Marx
did not foresee.
Right?
And what he did not foresee
were--and I probably will leave
it here;
there are two things what he
did not really foresee.
One, that actually this trend
turned around.
There is no more reduction of
self-employment;
in fact, there is some increase
of self-employment.
It varies from countries to
countries.
In Japan, big way. Right?
In the United States some
improvement in self-employment.
But self-employment is
stubbornly resistant.
Right?
You have supermarkets,
but you always do have your
corner deli shops,
and they don't seem to be
disappearing.
Right?
I even take my shoes to a
shoemaker to fix them.
Right?
So I mean, I do not throw my
shoes out, I go to a shoemaker
and they fix it for $25.00 for
me, and I don't buy a shoe for
150 bucks.
Right?
So, I mean, there is--mass
production has its limits.
Right?
There is a quality
production--right?--by artisans,
and we want that quality
production.
And the more important
argument: in fact,
Marx conceptualized wage
laborers as physical laborers.
Physical laborers,
as I pointed out,
manual laborers,
at least in advanced countries,
is this minority of the
society.
In the globe,
that's
different--right?--because
manufacturing and industrial
activity was kind of
decentralized in the world,
into the Third World.
But in the United States and in
Continental Europe it's a
thriving minority.
But there is a big new middle
class, and this new middle class
are those white collar workers,
like most of you will become
and what I am.
Right?
I mean, I'm--it's not
white--right?--the collar.
> Right?
But so that means,
in Marx's sense,
I hardly do any work.
Right?
What kind of value do I create?
What does it mean?
I am exploited?
Well I don't think Rick Levin
really exploits me.
>
Am I an exploiter?
No I don't think I exploit you
guys.
Or do you exploit me because I
have to stay up until midnight
to grade your assignments?
No, it's not really.
I actually occasionally have
fun reading your assignments.
Right?
So we have a new middle
class--right?--which simply does
not fit the analysis,
and where the notion of
exploitation loses its insight.
Okay, I'll leave it here.
Thank you.